Async raft sender - document in 5.26 (#3175)
neo4j/docs-operations: modules/ROOT/pages/clustering/troubleshooting.adoc

== Symptoms

Common symptoms include:

* Writes become slow, time out, or appear unavailable after one cluster member is stopped, shut down, or restarted.
* The problem lasts for approximately the configured `dbms.cluster.network.connect_timeout`, which is `30s` by default.
* The problem is more likely in environments where a stopped member's network endpoint continues to accept connection attempts instead of refusing them immediately.
This has been observed in Kubernetes environments, but it is not limited to Kubernetes.
* The Neo4j debug log can contain Raft sender connection timeout messages similar to:
+
[source, text]
----
Raft sender failed exceptionally [Address: <host>:7000]
...
io.netty.channel.ConnectTimeoutException: connection timed out after 30000 ms
----

If the network endpoint refuses connections immediately, the log can instead contain `Connection refused`.
That case is less likely to cause the write latency described here because the leader can move on to another member without waiting for the connection timeout.

[[clustering-troubleshooting-raft-sender-channel-acquisition-mitigation]]
== Mitigation

> In Neo4j 5.26.29 and later, enable asynchronous acquisition of Raft sender channels by setting xref:configuration/configuration-settings.adoc#config_dbms.cluster.raft.async_channel_acquisition_enabled[`dbms.cluster.raft.async_channel_acquisition_enabled`] to `true` in _neo4j.conf_ on all cluster members:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Starting with Neo4j 5.26.29, you can enable asynchronous acquisition of Raft sender channels by setting xref:configuration/configuration-settings.adoc#config_dbms.cluster.raft.async_channel_acquisition_enabled[`dbms.cluster.raft.async_channel_acquisition_enabled`] to `true` in _neo4j.conf_ on each cluster members:
```

[source, properties]
----
dbms.cluster.raft.async_channel_acquisition_enabled=true
----

Restart each member for the setting to take effect.

> This allows the leader to continue replicating to other members without blocking on a slow or hanging connection attempt to one member.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This allows the database leader to continue replicating to other members without blocking on a slow or hanging connection attempt to one member.
```

> Note that in Neo4j 5.26.29, this new setting makes an existing internal async Raft sender behavior available as a public setting.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[NOTE]
====
In Neo4j 5.26.29, this new setting makes an existing internal async Raft sender behavior available as a public setting.
```

> It does not introduce a new implementation or change the async Raft sender behavior itself.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It does not introduce a new implementation or change the async Raft sender behavior itself.
====
```

:description: Troubleshooting information for write delays when one cluster member is unavailable.
:page-role: enterprise-edition
[[clustering-troubleshooting-raft-sender-channel-acquisition]]
= Troubleshooting write delays when one cluster member is unavailable

> A cluster can experience delayed or unavailable writes if the leader waits for a Raft sender connection to a cluster member that has stopped but whose network endpoint still accepts connection attempts.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In Neo4j 5.26, a cluster can experience delayed or unavailable writes if the leader waits for a Raft sender connection to a cluster member that has stopped but whose network endpoint still accepts connection attempts.
```

:description: Troubleshooting information for write delays when one cluster member is unavailable.
:page-role: enterprise-edition

> [[clustering-troubleshooting]]

Reviewer 2: @renetapopova, should we remove the first hash here, line 3?

Reviewer: As you'd like. I don't think we are consistent across the pages.

> [[clustering-troubleshooting]]

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

```

[[clustering-troubleshooting-raft-sender-channel-acquisition]]
= Troubleshooting write delays when one cluster member is unavailable

> A cluster can experience delayed or unavailable writes if the leader waits for a Raft sender connection to a cluster member that has stopped but whose network endpoint still accepts connection attempts.

Reviewer 2: In https://github.com/neo4j/docs-operations/pull/3175/changes/56946a774d40f2d8fbfeb242c0bd901ad7cabff8, we removed reference to the 5.26 version. Does this mean that the problem can occur in other releases of the 5.x series and you can fix it by setting up the internal `async_channel_acquisition` setting to `true`?

Reviewer: It is removed only from the heading. The section starts with "Starting with Neo4j 5.26.29, you can enable  ..."

Reviewer 2: ah, I see.
But I was speaking about the line 11 in the commit https://github.com/neo4j/docs-operations/commit/56946a774d40f2d8fbfeb242c0bd901ad7cabff8.
The reference to 5.26 LTS was removed from the first sentence after the heading *Slow or unavailable writes when a cluster member is shut down*.
I think, we need this reference. Otherwise, the whole page reads like this issue can happen in any 5.x release and only starting with 5.26.29, you can mitigate it with the setting `...async_channel_acquisition`

Reviewer: Ah, yes, that makes sense.

== Symptoms

Common symptoms include:

* Writes become slow, time out, or appear unavailable after one cluster member is stopped, shut down, or restarted.
* The problem lasts for approximately the configured `dbms.cluster.network.connect_timeout`, which is `30s` by default.
* The problem is more likely in environments where a stopped member's network endpoint continues to accept connection attempts instead of refusing them immediately.
This has been observed in Kubernetes environments, but it is not limited to Kubernetes.
* The Neo4j debug log can contain Raft sender connection timeout messages similar to:
+
[source, text]
----
Raft sender failed exceptionally [Address: <host>:7000]
...
io.netty.channel.ConnectTimeoutException: connection timed out after 30000 ms
----

If the network endpoint refuses connections immediately, the log can instead contain `Connection refused`.
That case is less likely to cause the write latency described here because the leader can move on to another member without waiting for the connection timeout.

[[clustering-troubleshooting-raft-sender-channel-acquisition-mitigation]]
== Mitigation

> Starting with Neo4j 5.26.29, you can enable asynchronous acquisition of Raft sender channels by setting xref:configuration/configuration-settings.adoc#config_dbms.cluster.raft.async_channel_acquisition_enabled[`dbms.cluster.raft.async_channel_acquisition_enabled`] to `true` in _neo4j.conf_ on each cluster members:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Starting with Neo4j 5.26.29, you can enable asynchronous acquisition of Raft sender channels by setting xref:configuration/configuration-settings.adoc#config_dbms.cluster.raft.async_channel_acquisition_enabled[`dbms.cluster.raft.async_channel_acquisition_enabled`] to `true` in _neo4j.conf_ on each cluster member:
```

:description: Troubleshooting information for common Neo4j cluster availability and replication issues.

> [role=enterprise-edition]

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
:page-role: enterprise-edition
```

[[clustering-troubleshooting]]
= Troubleshooting

> This page describes known cluster issues and mitigations.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This page describes known cluster issues and their mitigations.
```

> This page describes known cluster issues and their mitigations.

Reviewer: I see only one issue. Do you know if we expect to add more?

Author: good point, removed in [71b24e8](https://github.com/neo4j/docs-operations/pull/3175/commits/71b24e89e6a6e61a01eef9e369eec25e933f95c4)

[[clustering-troubleshooting-raft-sender-channel-acquisition]]

> == Slow or unavailable writes when a cluster member is shut down

Reviewer: If we have just one issue, maybe this could be the title instead of "Troubleshooting." Something like: "Troubleshooting slow or unavailable writes"

Author: Good point, I've renamed the page to be more specific now in [71b24e8](https://github.com/neo4j/docs-operations/pull/3175/commits/71b24e89e6a6e61a01eef9e369eec25e933f95c4)

> In Neo4j 5.26 LTS, a cluster can experience delayed or unavailable writes if the leader waits for a Raft sender connection to a cluster member that has stopped but whose network endpoint still accepts connection attempts.

Reviewer: Given that we are on Neo4j 5.26, I don't think we need to say it explicitly.
```suggestion
A cluster can experience delayed or unavailable writes if the leader waits for a Raft sender connection to a cluster member that has stopped but whose network endpoint still accepts connection attempts.
```

> This can happen when a server, virtual machine, or container is killed or shut down, but the network layer does not immediately refuse connections to that member.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This can happen when a server, virtual machine, or container is stopped or shut down, but the network layer does not immediately refuse connections to that member.
```

Reviewer 2: we prefer not to use such words as 'kill'

Author: haha you'r right, sounds abit harsh

> When this happens, the leader may wait until `dbms.cluster.network.connect_timeout` elapses before it attempts to replicate to another member.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When this happens, the leader may wait until xref:configuration/configuration-settings.adoc#config_dbms.cluster.network.connect_timeout[`dbms.cluster.network.connect_timeout`] elapses before attempting to replicate data to another cluster member.
```

> In a three-member cluster, this can delay writes because Raft requires a quorum to receive the replication message.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In a three-member cluster, this can delay writes because the Raft protocol requires a quorum (two of the three members) to replicate the transaction before it can be committed.
```

[[clustering-troubleshooting-raft-sender-channel-acquisition-symptoms]]
=== Symptoms

Common symptoms include:

> * Writes become slow, time out, or appear unavailable after one cluster member is stopped, killed, or restarted.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Writes become slow, time out, or appear unavailable after one cluster member is stopped, shut down, or restarted.
```

* The problem lasts for approximately the configured `dbms.cluster.network.connect_timeout`, which is `30s` by default.
* The problem is more likely in environments where a stopped member's network endpoint continues to accept connection attempts instead of refusing them immediately.
This has been observed in Kubernetes environments, but it is not limited to Kubernetes.
* The Neo4j debug log can contain Raft sender connection timeout messages similar to:
+
[source, text]
----
Raft sender failed exceptionally [Address: <host>:7000]
...
io.netty.channel.ConnectTimeoutException: connection timed out after 30000 ms
----

If the network endpoint refuses connections immediately, the log can instead contain `Connection refused`.
That case is less likely to cause the write latency described here because the leader can move on to another member without waiting for the connection timeout.

[[clustering-troubleshooting-raft-sender-channel-acquisition-mitigation]]

> === Mitigation in Neo4j 5.26 LTS

Reviewer: Same here.
```suggestion
=== Mitigation
```

> In Neo4j 5.26 LTS, enable asynchronous acquisition of Raft sender channels by setting the following internal setting to `true` in _neo4j.conf_ on all cluster members:

Reviewer: and here

[source, properties]
----
internal.dbms.cluster.raft.async_acquisition_of_raft_sender_channels=true
----

Restart each member for the setting to take effect.
This allows the leader to continue replicating to other members without blocking on a slow or hanging connection attempt to one member.

[NOTE]
====

> *Behavior from Neo4j 2025.02* +

Reviewer: I think this note doesn't belong on this page. If I am on 5.26, why would I care about 2026.02? But if I'm on 2026.01, then I need to know how to fix it. 
Maybe, instead of having this note here, explain a bit in the current version if we haven't already done that, and add a note that in previous version, "a cluster can experience delayed or unavailable writes if the leader waits for a Raft sender connection to a cluster member that has stopped but whose network endpoint still accepts connection attempts." and link to that page.

Author: you'r right, mentioning 2025.02 is not needed, I've removed in [65a27a5](https://github.com/neo4j/docs-operations/pull/3175/commits/65a27a5260815f159d0ae7a55be57e47ffc792f8)

> Starting in Neo4j 2025.02, the setting is available as link:https://neo4j-docs-operations-3174.surge.sh/operations-manual/2026.07/configuration/configuration-settings/#config_dbms.cluster.raft.async_channel_acquisition_enabled[`dbms.cluster.raft.async_channel_acquisition_enabled`] and defaults to `true`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Starting with Neo4j 2025.02, the setting is available as xref:configuration/configuration-settings.adoc#config_dbms.cluster.raft.async_channel_acquisition_enabled[`dbms.cluster.raft.async_channel_acquisition_enabled`] and defaults to `true`.
```

> Starting with Neo4j 2025.02, the setting is available as xref:configuration/configuration-settings.adoc#config_dbms.cluster.raft.async_channel_acquisition_enabled[`dbms.cluster.raft.async_channel_acquisition_enabled`] and defaults to `true`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Starting with Neo4j 2025.02, the setting is available as link:{neo4j-docs-base-uri}/operations-manual/current/configuration/configuration-settings/#config_dbms.cluster.raft.async_channel_acquisition_enabled[`dbms.cluster.raft.async_channel_acquisition_enabled`] and defaults to `true`.
```
